# SCI-6472-DataVisualization-FinalProject
Final Project for SCI-6472 at the Harvard GSD, Fall 2022

This project was completed by Sharon Welch, Sarika, Chawla, and Masen Boucher as part of CSCI E-171 Visualization. Interacting with these visualizations should be fairly straightforward for the user, featuring a series of hover tooltips and dropdown menu selections. Little to no code-based interaction should be needed, although sufficient documentation has been included in the body of the code to allow for edits and changes. The goal of the project is to address gender disparities in cycling -- from decreased ridership in women, to the lack of research into chronic health issues, to preliminary data suggesting that women are more affected by these issues, and to understanding how differences in the saddle type affects men and women differently. <b>Our target audience includes executives at a bicycle company, with the goal of convincing them of the following: 
1) Less women cycle -- this may be due to discomfort associated with the activity. 
2) While a few studies have investigated how cycling affects chronic health issues, much of it has focused on men. 
3) The evidence that does exist supports the idea that these issues are more prevalent in women than men. 
4) Saddle type, potentially due to changes in pressure distribution, may exacerbate or improve these outcomes in a gender-specific manner. This is an easily modifiable factor. 
5) This issue is WORTH investing resources and time into. Not only can the experience of female cyclists be improved, this might also increase female ridership, and in turn, increase the customer base and company profit. </b>

Following our title slide that introduces the problem, our first visualization is a <b>Circle Timeline</b> that displays ridership data. There is a large disparity in the number of trips by bike taken by men and women. This viz covers the years 2010-2019, comparing male and female ridership. If you hover over a given circle, it will provide further details about the trips taken by individuals of each gender that year. While there might be factors related to safety at play, there is also evidence that comfort and health may contribute to this difference as well. 

Next, the viewer is presented with a <b> Pie Chart </b> visualization that displays the current state of the scientific literature. The chart features studies in men (blue), women (pink), and both (purple), with each slice of the pie representing an individual study. If you hover over the pie chart, you can see details for each study, including the name, publication year, and type of study. Although there is a lack of research across the board, women are particularly affected. 

Of the preliminary data collected on these issues, it seems that women are more affected than men. In the following visualization, our <b>Scatterplot</b>, we begin to examine this data. Here, the data is again stratified between men (blue) and women (pink). Plotted along the x-axis are different predictors (i.e. things related to cycling that could affect health outcome). <b>Predictors</b> include things like length of time cycling, average speed, and saddle type, among others. To the left of the scatterplot, there is a drop down to allow you to select among all of the predictors. When a selecton is made, the scatterplot will automatically update to reflect the new predictort. Plotted along the y-axis are different health outcomes (i.e. symptoms that may be associated with cycling). <b>Health Outcomes</b> include symptoms like genital numbness, urinary tract inflections, and saddle sores, among others. Similiarly to the predictors, there is a dropdown to the left of the scatterplot that allows you to select among all of the health outcomes. When a new outcome is selected, the scatterplot will update accordingly. This visualization demonstrates that, despite the lower number of female cyclists, a similar number of men and women are affected by these issues, which is indicative of a higher rate of these issues in women. Of the predictors, type of saddle is particularly promising based off of the preliminary data, as well as the ease with which this factor can be modified.

To investigate this further, we plotted several <b>Symbol Plots</b>, each featuring a different saddle type, to examine the rate or certain symptoms, or the average symptom score between men and women. These three saddle types were selected because of pressure data that would be incorporated into your final visualization. The symbol plots function similarly to the scatterplot, but with less data (a single average data point) to better understand the trends. There is another dropdown menu that allows the user to select different health outcomes, which will then automatically populate on the symbol plots. These figures further reinforce the fact that these symptoms are generally more frequent, and worse, in women. The one exception that we observe is improved scores on certain measures for women on the complete cutout saddle. This demonstrates that health outcomes differ as an effect of gender and of saddle type, as well as the interaction between the two factors. But what is it about different saddle types that mediates this effect? 

Our final visualization, the <b>Saddle Pressure Maps</b>, investigate one factor we feel may be mediating this effect -- <b>Pressure</b>. Here, the user can input their age, height, weight, and gender to see personalized pressure maps for each of the three saddle types in the symbol plots. When toggling back and forth between male and female data, one can appreciate how the distribution of pressure differs as an effect of sex, and, further, that this interacts with the shape and support offered by the saddle. Users can compare these results to the health outcomes on the prior slide to understand how pressure might affect the symptom prevalence. 

We close the project with an overview of our content, as well as a call to action -- <b> this issue is not only a significant public health issue, it is an issue that is worthwhile for bicycle companies to invest in. These efforts can not only lead to improvements for the comfort of female riders, but can also translate to an increase in the number of female cyclists, and, ultimately, loyal customers, improving the company's profit.</b> 
